Turkey and Israel used to be good
friends but in recent years relations
between the two Mediterranean countries
have deteriorated for this falling-out
increased tensions in the region
[Music]
Istanbul for almost 500 years the
capital city of a great Empire
from here on the Bosporus the Ottomans
ruled much of Southeast Europe Western
Asia and North Africa
[Music]
in the Arab world special status was
granted to many cities especially to the
holy city of Jerusalem
[Music]
for centuries the Ottoman rulers were
custodians of the places in Jerusalem
sacred to Muslims Christians and Jews
[Music]
the Muslim Sultan's welcomed into the
Ottoman Empire those Jews who were
driven out of Spain when it was
reconquered by the Christians in 1492
this museum in Istanbul today bears
testament to the place of the Jewish
community in the Ottoman Empire
[Music]
in 1922 the Ottoman Sultanate was
formally abolished and a year later
Turkey became a secular republic with
Kemal atatürk as its president Turkish
Jewish relations strengthened when
turkey recognized the State of Israel in
1949 the first mainly Muslim country to
do so the relationship between Turkey
and Israel developed over the next half
a century strong military and trade ties
drew the two countries ever closer
together but the geopolitics of the
region is changing as turkey rediscovers
its historical ties to the Arab world
[Music]
Republican turkey basically had a new
identity which said we have nothing to
do with the Middle East will change our
alphabet and have nothing to do with the
Arabs that paradigm has failed so
turkeys rediscovering that it is the air
of the Ottoman Empire that it has deep
historical ties of the peoples of the
region and also there is this idea that
Turks used to be a central part in this
narrative and that can be reclaimed
straddling two continents Turkey's
economy is growing so too is its
political role on the world stage with
half a million soldiers turkey has the
second largest army of NATO after the
United States its relationship with
Israel has been rocky of late the
Israeli consulate in Istanbul is today
located in an unmarked building a matter
of security through anonymity a sign of
how this one's close alliance is today
on less stable ground the way it
developed was very suspicious from the
start
turkey recognized Israel in 1949 not
necessarily just cuz it loved Israel but
because that was its entry card into the
Western camp the the fact that Turkey
was with willing to have relationship
with Israel had to do with its
relationship with the West and the fear
of the Soviet Union and Israel was part
of the West
Tork Israeli relations has always been
problematic since the beginning since
the emergence of Israel there was a
concept developed by the first Israeli
Prime Minister David ben-gurion
of a
Alliance of the periphery he sought to
develop relations with outer perimeter
of the Middle Eastern Arab states
including Persia at that time
for the revolution Ethiopia and Turkey
since then relations developed into a
close you could even call it strategic
alliance political and but especially
defence relations military relations
very close we had joint exercise we had
well-developed
cooperation between our defense
industries strategic dialogue there one
spicy I myself used to lead military
delegations to Turkey had many friends
turkish general stuff yes
turkish israeli relationship was
probably late 90s when turkey was under
the thumb of generals very securest
generals who had a fear of Islamic
fundamentalism during the 1990s the
undemocratic forces the generals and the
allies of the armed forces in Turkey
very strong and the they control most of
the policies especially security
policies and the Israelis established
very good relations with this
undemocratic forces in Turkey in 2002
the Justice and Development Party known
in Turkey as the AK Party won a
landslide victory in parliamentary
elections
despite the change of leadership initial
signs where the turkeys new rulers would
seek not only to continue but to even
deepen relations with Israel
well when a kewpie came to power in
Turkey 2002 it had no anti Israeli
stamps Prime Minister our Diwan tried to
improve relations with Israel everyone
visited Israel in 2005 visited the
Holocaust Museum he criticized
anti-semitism at home
[Music]
but Turkey was not going to limit its
friends Turkish Prime Minister ratchet
tie up other one also courted the
Palestinian Hamas movement turkey took
the position that any
israeli-palestinian peace deal must
include Hamas in Tel Aviv that was not
the sort of language Israeli leaders
wanted to hear little by little when
after the second okapi elections this
was the beginning of a change because
they felt strong enough to to do
different things both ideologically
politically and militarily on all these
levels we started to see the change and
it had also influence on Israel
[Music]
the Israelis fool themselves I think a
bit about this I think they're being a
little disingenuous a lot of Israelis
will tell you that we naturally have a
wonderful relationship with Turkey and
the Elder Wand the Islamist demon broke
it but this is completely untrue the
idea that it was a warm relationship I
think is belied by the fact that Turkey
did not appoint an ambassador to Israel
until 1992 at the point where Israel
seemed as though was wishing to make
peace with the Palestinians the 90s was
a time that you know that Israel and
Turkey was probably closest to each
other but people forget that the 90s was
an era of peace in Palestine
[Applause]
[Music]
any hopes of peace in the Middle East
was set back by Israel's military
incursion into the West Bank in 2002
there was further full-scale
confrontation at the end of 2008 when
Israel launched its war on Gaza conflict
in the region exasperated Turkish
efforts at mediation between the
Israelis and the Arabs the degradation
of this so-called natural friendship
with not turkeys choosing that's another
myth in Israel we never took any step in
or to harm our residents turkey we
attributed the strategic importance to
the relations of Turkey
all along the way we still eager to have
strategic lessons take if this was just
possible government in Turkey have been
adopting a different approach the kind
of relations turkey should every Israeli
shouldn't have been like that had it not
been taken by the Turks wouldn't have
been in where we are today
in the first seven years of AKP rule I
mean you can say we cannot speak of a
big problem with between AKP and Israel
plus actually AKP government tried to
broker a peace deal between Syria and
Israel and they came close to doing that
right before the Israeli attack on Gaza
[Music]
the problem for everyone was that they
took that decision three days after he
had taken the Israeli prime minister to
dinner in his house for four and talked
to him for five hours and had brought at
that point Syria on to the other line to
another room doing what he thought was
brokering broking the part the last met
the last steps towards a peace deal
between Israel and Syria but Israel
decided not to tell everyone that there
was going to be a problem on the horizon
that they were going to do Operation
Cast Lead turkeys relationship with
Israel is indexed to the Palestinian
question and then we have 1,400 people
killed by Israeli forces in attacks on
Gaza so many of them civilians he
couldn't take it him this was not a
Turkish decision this was an Israeli
decision to boil that relationship out
of the water there was no other perhaps
that Israel had no choice in which case
they should have done they should have
treated turkey differently they took
Turkey for granted and Turkey did not
forget it and especially aired on did
not forget he took it very personally so
that's one decision by Israel to
downgrade the relationship
saying this but they actually says it
took you six crew but that may get
interested in Maine so here businesses
to tell us lieutenant us to moodle's
atto he be doing each it is about four
county up to hold on each additional
parameters in the vicinity redeems a man
candy maybe a bus come out the ambush
become a loser Owens anger at Israel was
taken up by the Turkish film industry
a Turkish TV series telling the story of
a Palestinian family became a big hit
when it began its run in October 2009
scenes showing Israeli soldiers
targeting Palestinian children angered
Israel one scene proved particularly
controversial
[Music]
israelis are astonished with what they
see from turkey the kind of language
taken by Turkish leadership when they
deal with Israel is really hard to
accept in Israel and first of all we
know it's untrue it's extremely
difficult on the stem
[Music]
Israelis tend to sometimes think that
whatever they do to the Palestinians has
nothing to do with with how the rest of
the world looks at them that is not the
case especially in Turkey so it would be
wrong to think that oh if the generals
had remained in power in Turkey which
would be totally under more attic and
wrong for many reasons but from these
are even from the Israeli point of view
if they think that things would be very
different today they would they would be
I think mistaken no government in Turkey
would have stood silent in the face of
the war crimes in Gaza
[Music]
in January 2010 Israeli officials
decided on a TV spectacle of their own
further straining relations between
Ankara and Tel Aviv Israeli Foreign
Minister deliberately insults the
Turkish ambassador in front of cameras
makes him sit on a lower chair pointed
out to the TV and and basically makes
humiliating comments okay Israel
unusually apologizes but still an
Israeli decision to escalate the
situation
[Applause]
Israel I think abused Turkish friendship
and the turkey did not accept such an
attitude compared with the I think Arab
neighbors of Israel Turkey is a more
stronger country so is that I cannot
impose anything to such a strong country
the relationship between Turkey and
Israel was to become even more bitter on
May 31st 2010 a flotilla of boats
carrying humanitarian aid to Gaza was
intercepted by the Israeli Navy
we are international civilians legally
the flotillas lead vessel was the Mavi
Marmara a Turkish ferry carrying more
than 600 people
the Israelis decided to attack the lead
boat of that for tiller in international
waters at the time it was steaming
southwards towards each wasn't going
towards Gaza at that point it was going
south to Egypt and they chose to do it
in a manner which if they had thought
about it was bound to cause a lot of
trouble
[Music]
before they came the boat they have
started to use their weapons not only
weapons as I say the bombs and
everything's without any warning
they have directly used the guns
directly nine people killed and not just
that if you read the reports about what
happened afterwards the the
extraordinary ill-treatment of everybody
on those ships in Israel whatever
happened on board you still have two
days later people including many Turks
being beaten into a pulp on the ground
in Bangor and Airport by uniformed
Israeli officials and security people
some of them had to be hospitalized this
is not a Turkish decision
this was Israeli actions
[Applause]
we asked them not to let this ship come
that's why we said we are not going to
apologize for something that we didn't
initiate and we were forced and we put
deliberately in this position
[Music]
we have never ever think that they can
do something like of course they have
capacity to stop the board with
different ways not like this the Turkish
society have been changed by the Israeli
people's after Mavi Marmara the first
time in turkish republic history first
time all colors of the turkey have
agreed to be against to israel the
leftist rightist nationalist separatist
who every day such a barbarity cannot be
accepted by any civilian civic country
the problem is the Israel Turkey even
after the Marmara they tried to find
peaceful solutions and asked Israeli
governments apology and compensation
they did not accept their sin and they
did not accept to pay anything to the
victims families
if they continue in this way Turkey
Israel issues cannot be checked on
friendly base they behave like terrorist
organization with Turkish Israeli
relations at an all-time low
following the naval raid on the Gaza
bound flotilla Israeli Foreign Minister
Avigdor Lieberman weighed in with a
harsh warning Israel began courting
other Mediterranean neighbors
what has added a new element to the
geopolitics in the region has been the
recent discovery of large reserves of
gas and oil beneath the eastern
Mediterranean you can see that Israel is
teaming up with Cyprus to a great deal
in the East Mediterranean gas story
there's now an Israel Cyprus Greece
power line being studied probably be led
by 2016
you see diplomatic maneuvers between
those three countries and you also see
defence pacts between those countries
now that to Turkey is obviously hostile
large gas fields have been discovered
approximately 80 kilometers off Israel's
coast the find has triggered a new
geopolitical conflict as Lebanon claims
part of a gas field lies in Lebanese
territorial waters but it's the island
of Cyprus which has become a new tension
spot between Israel and Turkey Turkey
has been angered by an agreement the
Cypriot government has signed with
Israel dividing exploration rights in
the region
[Music]
cypress has been split between Greek and
Turkish zones since turkey invaded in
1974 and seized the northern third of
the island with Israel courting the
Greek Cypriots Turkey has renewed its
campaign on behalf of Turkish Cypriots
[Music]
the gas bonanza in the eastern
Mediterranean risks further stirring
political tensions in the region and
Cyprus is at the very epicenter
[Music]
the island of Cyprus has become a new
tension spot between Israel and Turkey
the discovery of natural gas in the
exclusive economic zone of Cyprus has
given hope to people and it has rightly
given hope to people it's just that the
major impact of these discoveries in
terms of financial growth will come
mostly in the medium and long term
rather than immediately though are I to
say that already
we are experiencing an enhanced interest
on behalf of investors who are visiting
the island to position themselves as
here as of day one
[Music]
the offshore gas in the eastern
Mediterranean for Israel and also I
think to some extent for Cyprus and
Lebanon is a game changer these are
three countries which do not have their
own energy resources I have always been
dependent on importing energy Israel and
Cyprus will start benefiting from this
cooperation between them
probably cemented or at least advanced
in the recent historic village of
Netanyahu to Cyprus sister it's amazing
which is the first visit of an Israeli
prime minister to Cyprus ever I think
that the benefit for Cyprus and Israel
which starts will be apparent within
three to five years the discovery of
natural gas in our area opens new
opportunities but not only in terms of
economic growth I would say it also
offers an opportunity for countries that
have political problems between them in
this region to decide and resolve the
problems of the past so that they can
all cooperate peacefully afterwards to
capitalize on these opportunities so
that relations between the whole of
Cyprus and Turkey can normalize and so
that Cyprus and Turkey can cooperate as
partners in peace even in the energy
sector
[Music]
and I simply defining what your gas is
making this jingoistic mood with
Netanyahu is in visa vie Iran more
feasible for them vote from Netanyahu so
this is a huge political tool for for
Israel genuinely but for the current
government in particular you might look
at a situation within in which in which
within five or ten years the majority of
grausen is one will be electric taking
their electricity from an electricity
grid that is powered mainly by gas and
therefore cutting down on various very
significantly on in need of Israel to
import oil in terms of Turkey in Cyprus
and Israel clearly the the partnership
with Cyprus is now here to stay because
the noble energy the Texas oil company
that is doing the work in Israel and in
Cyprus is partly Israeli owned
[Music]
I visited Israel where I had the
opportunity to meet with four ministers
of the government as well as with the
office of the Prime Minister where we
exchanged views as to how we could
promote cooperation between Cyprus and
Israel both in energy but in other
sectors of the economy such as let's say
tourism
[Applause]
cyprus must find a way and turkey must
also find a way within the next few
months start talking about the possible
pipeline from cyprus to Turkey for the
onward sale of that gas because that is
probably the most economic route Turkey
has limited energy sources of its own
but it is adjacent to some of the
world's largest gas suppliers it is
positioning itself as a key transit hub
for Russian and Central Asian gas
supplies to Europe at the same time
Turkey has launched its own exploration
in and around Cyprus any major
discoveries it makes may well fuel the
simmering crisis
in September 2011 Turkish media reported
Israeli f-15 fighter jets buzzed over a
Turkish ship exploring for natural gas
reserves near Cyprus according to the
reports turkey sent two f16 jets to
track the Israeli planes which
subsequently returned to Israel
the areas were we going to produce gas
have nothing to do stir and yes we look
very much forward to be to being less
dependent on inputs and hopefully turn
into exporters the question of who has
the right to tap deposits in the region
is raising the political stakes
so there's a growing sense of like what
will happen in these Mediterranean is
important for us and we should have a
say about that because Turkey now is
also seeing this as a matter of
political power in the eastern
Mediterranean
[Music]
had to find new you know partners it not
only Cyprus also our Romania and
Bulgaria and Israel is trying to find
new relationships so in order to to try
and compensate for the the you know the
relationship bed relationship with
Turkey
they try to make surround to church they
are making as you see the relation with
the cyclists revelation with decreased
relation with Azerbaijan Turkey is
suspicious of Israeli moves to
strengthen relations with Cyprus as well
as with Romania Bulgaria and with
Azerbaijan to the east of Turkey you can
even say that Israel is competing a bit
with Turkey and Azerbaijan for instance
ways Rael has made big arm sales against
the clearly the clear wish of tech I
didn't think it was openly expressed but
I think turkey is uncomfortable seeing
that it's big ethnic cousin and friend
being so clearly aligned with with with
Israel
[Music]
Israeli armed sales to Azerbaijan worth
billions of dollars have made headlines
both at home and abroad Turkey is
concerned about this growing
relationship and what it may mean for
the region especially given that
Azerbaijan is strategically located on
iran's northern border there is an arms
race in that region and israel is
contributing to that arms race both
politically and materially israel's new
opening into the caucasus region on
turkey's eastern border also encompasses
the Armenians it has double
opportunities in the region one is
recent standoff with Turkey where turkey
is vulnerable on the Armenian Genocide
issue and then there is Iran and the war
rhetoric is sounding louder and louder
recently even the bait rod is actively
participating because it has an axe to
grind with Iran so should Iran fall
apart
they think the fallout will benefit
other Bridgend they will take over not
northern Iran northern other Belgium
which has a bigger territory than the
actual territory of the republic of
other day they may never get to what
they wanted but they will be used in the
process by Israel and United States to
dismantle to bring down the Iran
[Music]
present violation of Israeli government
have some very rightist agzam extremist
groups including a Victrola Burman who
is the foreign minister who was the
spokesman even stronger than Netanyahu
himself rebuking Turkey and he said that
he was going to come to visit United
States meet with meet with our leaders
and try to pass the Armenian Genocide
resolution in the Congress
[Music]
one of the reasons that Turkey valued
its relationship with Israel so much
until very recently is that Turkey
relied on pro-israeli Lobby support in
the West particularly Washington but it
may be even even in France on the shelf
Armenian Genocide and it has supported
Turkey on on this particular issue so
that was important for Turkey Israeli
lawmakers recently discussed in
Parliament whether to commemorate the
Armenian Genocide no decision has been
made
but this controversial issue could
further aggravate the already strained
relations with Turkey the government has
made it a point not to do anything about
the Armenian issue in spite of the
pressure from the Armenian community
it's the foreign ministry and the you
know stand on both their legs to stop
anything which might bring Israel to -
to deny - I mean to accept this idea of
genocide of the Armenians so at this
point this for sure until now at least
all the governments we're for supporting
Turkey on this point the Turkish
government on this point and maybe you
know the Jewish lobby in in the United
States is not working so hard and is the
edited done in the past in supporting
turkeys moved maybe Turks also have the
concern that if this if the ethnic
cleansing of Armenians is defined
internationally legally as genocide this
will lead to some political consequences
Turkey will need to pay like war
reparations
maybe Armenia will demand some land from
Turkey some cities and East's Amenia
says about 1.5 million Armenians were
killed during World War one in a
deliberate policy of genocide ordered by
the Ottoman government Turkey rejects
the genocide claims the issue has now
become part of the Turkish Israel
fallout the same thing is right
using the Armenian Genocide as a
political issue unfortunately this is
the nature of politics Israel David bash
kana science Shimon Peres see Casilla
debated Europe mr. shimon peres when he
went to anchor a couple of years ago he
had the nerve to stand up and say that
the real atrocities or arming bicycle
not amount to genocide
[Music]
in December 2011 Israel canceled a
multi-million dollar contract to supply
Turkey with an advanced aerial
intelligence system months earlier
Turkey had frozen 16 arms deals with
Israel including a 5 billion dollar
contract for 1,000 mccarver tanks the
council deals reflect a profound
reassessment of strategic ties between
the two countries all most of our
previous cooperation stop there's no
military cooperation whatsoever no
exercise no strategic dialogue it all
stopped enough political tension
the unraveling of military links between
the two countries has underlined the
seriousness of the current confrontation
turkey had been Israel's biggest trading
partner in the region
some Israeli economists have warned of
the costly damage to Israeli exports of
the ongoing diplomatic feud with turkey
yet trade between Turkey and Israel in
the non military and defense sectors
actually increased in both 2010 and 2011
one thing that is very pragmatic about
the AKP is that it's a very trade
oriented government and our Diwan would
never do something which will which will
overshadow the interests of Turkish
Turkish merchants and investors and and
companies so with regards to Israel - I
mean I think in Turkish government would
not ever try to try to to curtail trade
between Israel and in Turkey that's
something different from governmental
relations the private and governmental
trade between the countries it lasts for
at least 40 years 2011 was on one of the
good years which this volume reached
overlord four million dollars israel
normally it's exporting more to the
world and importing less with turkeys
the opposite
in recent years Israel has built
factories in Turkey and is manufacture
and goods there
the orders are coming to Turkey turkey
is producing it in a joint venture
between Turkey and Israelis and the
goods are exported by turkey as made in
Turkey but when you invest in a country
you are there for good you are there for
a long time
[Music]
Turkey's 30 billion dollar annual trade
with the Arab world and Iran Dwarfs its
trade with Israel
even so Turkish Israel trade marked a
30% increase in 2011 from Turkey Israel
buys appliances machinery and
manufactured goods among other things
from Israel turkey buys agriculture
products such as drip irrigation and
computer chips the Misaki family came to
Israel many years ago from Iraq they
have been importing goods from Turkey
since 1959 for them trade with Turkey
has not been affected by the political
conflict from Turkey especially we buy
hazelnuts figs
and apricots sometimes cherries
sometimes - iou's people in Israel
thinks that all the dried fruits come
from Turkey a lot of people were very
angry with Turkey it's like in the
newspaper the all the the press
everything a television all everybody
said that there are no relations with
Turkey turkey doesn't want relations
with Israel and if turkey doesn't want
and Israel doesn't want some trade may
have been unaffected but the freeze in
relations has hit the once thriving
tourism industry between Turkey and
Israel
[Music]
in 2008 some 500,000 Israelis visited
Turkey by 2011 that number had gone down
to 75,000
[Music]
I think there's no policy about this but
on the public level if there is an
Israeli hummus in Turkish markets and
written in Hebrew I think it won't sell
too much and people on Twitter would say
let's not buy this because the money for
this goes for the bullets that killed
people in Gaza so I think that sentiment
is there but maybe some of the products
are buying our Israeli may be data
notice that but if it is noticeable I
don't think it will be good for the
sales of their company
a new shift of power appears to be
taking place on the shores of the
Mediterranean as turkey's international
influence increases
Israel has long been the regional
heavyweight that some of its actions
have aroused deep anger within Turkey
[Music]
both countries are important allies of
the United States but they have become
engaged in a diplomatic and geopolitical
rivalry with each side asserting its
influence and seeking to outmaneuver the
other in the region competition over
recently discovered gas resources risks
fueling this rivalry in the eastern
Mediterranean
you